---
published: false
---
Always have backups
: Backups will not prevent you from nuking your machine; they will only
make the restore process possible.
•
Always test your infrastructur
e code (playbooks/r
oles) in a non-pr
oduction envir
onment
:
Companies have developed dif
ferent pipelines to deploy code and those usually include
environments such as dev
, test, staging, and production. Use the same pipeline to test your
infrastructure code. If a buggy application reaches the production environment it could be a
problem. If a buggy playbook reaches the production environment, it could be catastrophic.
•
Always peer
-review your infrastructur
e code
: Some companies have already introduced peer
-
reviews for the application code, but very few have introduced it for the infrastructure code. As
I was saying in the previous point, I think infrastructure code is way more critical than
application code, so you should always peer
-review your infrastructure code, whether you do it
for your application code or not.
•
Enable SELinux
: SELinux is a security kernel module that is available on all Linux
distributions (it is installed by default on Fedora, Red Hat Enterprise Linux, CentOS, Scientific
Linux, and Unbreakable Linux). It allows you to limit users and process powers in a very
granular way
. I suggest using SELinux instead of other similar modules (such as AppArmor)
because it is able to handle more situations and permissions. SELinux will prevent a huge
amount of damage because, if correctly configured, it will prevent many dangerous commands
from being executed.
•
Run the playbooks fr
om a limited account
: Even though user and privilege escalation
schemes have been in UNIX code for more than 40 years, it seems as if not many companies
use them. Using a limited user for all your playbooks, and escalating privileges only for
commands that need higher privileges will help prevent you nuking a machine while trying to
clean an application temporary folder
.
•
Use horizontal privilege escalation
: The
sudo
is a well-known command
but is often used in
its more dangerous form. The
sudo
command supports the '
-u
' parameter that will allow you
to specify a user that you want to impersonate. If you have to change a file that is owned by
another user
, please do not escalate to
root
to do so, just escalate to that user
. In Ansible, you
can use the
become_user
parameter to achieve this.
•
When possible, don't run a playbook on all your machines at the same time
: Staged
deployments can help you detect a problem before it's too late. There are many problems that
are not detectable in a dev
, test, staging, and qa environment. The majority of them are related to
load that is hard to emulate properly in those non-production environments. A new
configuration you have just added to your Apache HTTPd or MySQL servers could be perfectly
OK from a syntax point of view
, but disastrous for your specific application under your
production load. A staged deployment will allow you to test your new configuration on your
actual load without risking downtime if something was wrong.
•
Avoid guessing commands
and modifiers
: A lot of system administrators will try to remember
the right parameter and try to guess if they don't remember it exactly
. I've done it too, a lot of
times, but this is very risky
. Checking the man page or the online documentation will usually
take you less than two minutes and often, by reading the manual, you'll find interesting notes
you did not know
. Guessing modifiers is dangerous because you could be fooled by a non-
standard modifier (that is,
-v
is not the
verbose mode for
grep
and
-h
is not the
help
command for the MySQL CLI).
•
Avoid err
or-pr
one commands
: Not all commands have been created equally
. Some commands
are (way) more dangerous than others. If you can assume a
cat
command safe, you have to
assume that a
dd
command is dangerous, since
dd
perform copies and conversion of files and
volumes. I've seen people using
dd
in scripts to transform DOS files to UNIX (instead of
dos2unix
) and many other
, very dangerous, examples. Please, avoid such commands, because
they could result in a huge disaster if something goes wrong.
•
Avoid unnecessary modifiers
: If you need to delete a simple file, use
rm ${file}
not
rm -
rf ${file}
. The latter is often performed by users that have learned that; "to be sure, always
use
rm -rf
", because at some time in their past, they have had to delete a folder
. This will
prevent you from deleting an entire folder if the
${file}
variable is set wrongly
.
•
Always check what could happen if a variable is not set
: If you want to delete the contents of
a folder and you use the
rm -rf ${folder}/*
command, you are looking for trouble. If
the
${folder}
variable is not set for some reason, the shell will read a
rm -rf /*
command, which is deadly (considering the fact that the
rm -rf /
command will not work on
the majority of current OSes because it requires a
--no-preserve-root
option, while
rm
-rf /*
will work as expected). I'm using this specific command as an example because I have
seen such situations: the variable was pulled from a database which, due to some maintenance
work, was down and an empty string was assigned to that variable. What happened next is
probably easy to guess. In case you cannot prevent using variables in dangerous places, at least
check them to see if they are not empty before using them. This will not save you from every
problem
but may catch some of the most common ones.
•
Double check your r
edir
ections
: Redirections (along with pipes) are the most powerful
elements of Linux shells. They could also be very dangerous: a
cat /dev/rand > /dev/
sda
command can destroy a disk even if a
cat
command is usually overlooked because it's not
usually dangerous. Always double-check all commands that include a redirection.
•
Use specific modules wher
ever possible
: In this list I've used shell commands because many
people will try to use Ansible as if it's just a way to distribute them: it's not. Ansible provides a
lot of modules and we'll see them in this book. They will help you create more readable,
portable, and safe playbooks.


Learning Ansible 2, Second Edition
